In recent years, we've enjoyed watching the Inside Story and it really has helped us to get to know some of the students a little better and to get the Inside Story.
So let's enjoy this presentation of the Inside Story is presented by one of the other lecturers or the instructors in Gilead, Brother Richard Chilton.
All of us have a story.
But how is that story written?
A literal book contains a beginning, a middle, and an end.
And by the time we hold that book in our hand, each chapter has been carefully analyzed and locked in.
That story is done, finished.
Well what about us?
Do you ever feel that your story is pretty much locked in, finished?
That the opportunity to make changes in connection with your service to Jehovah has passed you by?
If so, please pay special attention to what our guests have to share with us today on this edition of the Inside Story.
The first couple we would like to introduce is Tomash and Eva Marushka from Slovakia.
What Tomash and Eva, it is so nice to have you with us on this edition of the Inside Story. Welcome.
Thank you.
Now we understand that you both grew up in a country that was under bear.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
We remember growing up when the work was under bear.
The change came later in 1989 at the end of the year.
And finally in 1993 the work was officially registered as Jehovah's Witnesses.
During a band all the things are very different like we know today.
For example there were no assemblies, no conventions at all, publicly held like today.
Of course no kingdom halls were available at that time.
So how did you hold your meetings if there were no assemblies and no kingdom halls?
So I remember they were held in small groups in private homes of our brothers.
And usually they were held very late in the evening.
As children we really struggled to stay awake and do not fall asleep during a meeting.
Under those circumstances how did you handle the matter of literature?
So there were no officially printed and imported publications from our organization.
It was forbidden under ban. However we had homemade publications.
I remember growing up on a book, My Book of Bible Stories.
It was transcripts of the stories but without no pictures.
So we had to really use our imagination and just to imagine all those stories.
Also in our family.
Tell us a little bit about your side of that story too.
Yeah, very similar thing.
My parents were involved in literature production.
It was either by typing or by photography.
Now when you were both children and growing up under this environment
were you allowed into these rooms where this printing was taking place?
So we are very curious as kids and of course we still try to figure out what is inside.
We called it a secret room because all the secrets were kept there.
And there was this equipment for making copies of literature, simple camera,
it took a photo and then with a magnifier they could make a different size of publications.
Smaller it was, it was easier to carry for friends to meetings and also easier to hide of course.
Now Eva it went just beyond this secret room in the attic in your house.
There was another method that your parents used in connection with this literature.
Can you tell us about that?
Yeah actually the literature then needed to be transported somehow to the groups
that were using the publications or to the families.
So my parents did it the way that they taken the publications,
put it to the back seat of the car behind the back seat of the car.
Now did you and your siblings know this literature was in the car?
No, they couldn't tell us.
And there was also the way that they put it under our feet.
And actually we are six kids and I am the youngest.
So they put like four, five or six of us to the back seat of the car.
We were sitting there patiently.
And you know those cute little faces, they don't look like smugglers.
When it's obvious your parents were thinking it through to protect everyone
and to keep the work going.
That must have been very interesting growing up under those circumstances.
Let's move now into your teen years and your early adult life.
What was some of the circumstances that you had observed
that affected your view or attitude towards regular pioneering
in just the full time service in general?
So when I was growing up we had no regular pioneer at all in our congregation
and also just very few in our area.
Was there any particular reason why there were so few pioneers in your area?
I would say that it took time to introduce and to understand the concept of pioneering.
So sometimes more other spiritual goals were considered as more important.
Because during a band nobody was really preaching publicly.
So it took the time to understand this concept
and really to have pioneers in the congregation.
And I remember the first one that I really met
and had the chance to work with was when I was 16.
At the time three special pioneers were assigned to our congregation,
one couple and one single brother.
And the single brother was accommodated in our home.
So for us as two boys it was really like to have an older brother
at home, a spiritual single brother pioneering.
So we could really see first pioneer from flesh and blood,
to see him alive and to we could observe his goals
and he spent a lot of time with us.
So about how old were you then Thomas,
when you then started regular pioneering yourself?
So it was three years later,
it was when I was 19, I was the first one in our congregation.
I tried, but at the time it was still very little support.
We had just four regular pioneers in whole circuit.
So then after several months,
I was struggling with a quota and several challenges came.
So I decided to quit pioneering because I came to the conclusion
that it's not really probably for me,
so it's probably for others.
What about in your case, Eva?
Actually, I never, as a growing up,
I never had like really idea what the pioneering means.
So I didn't have that real need to start pioneering.
The first time I started pioneering was when we were already married.
And I said a goal to do it for one year,
but then also I stopped after one year.
Okay, now you're in your mid-adult life here.
What came next?
So I said that this was a turning point in our country
and we get several couples of missionaries.
And they really brought the zeal, the pioneering spirit
from our congregations where they were pounding for decades.
And this had a really nice influence on congregations and also circuits.
You had mentioned, Eva, that when the missionaries came,
you mentioned a specific effect they had on the rest of you.
You want to tell us about that?
Well, I think it was huge.
They just woke us up.
They shown us what the pioneering means
that you can really enjoy the ministry.
Yeah, we remember their enthusiasm for ministry.
And it was really catchy to hear this missionary chant.
These are going with the language.
So they were just learning Slovak, with the broken Slovak.
But they identified young couples
and really invested their time and energy.
They gave us a lot of day-free time,
not just during the ministry, but they...
We made a great friendships with them.
And until today we have great relationships with them.
And you had mentioned when you were out in the ministry with them,
what was something that they showed you was okay,
that added to your journey?
Well, it's a very important thing.
They showed us that we can drink coffee during the ministry.
Yeah, go to tell them coffee.
They made it fun for you.
So where did that lead to?
So then later when we moved to another congregation
and this nice spirit and support of missionaries,
we decided to start this couple.
Pioneering, I was around 28, 29 at this time.
And we decided to start from a new service here.
We really saw, really understand what does it mean
that Pioneer produced other pioneers?
Because within two years we had 25 or 26 regular pioneers.
That's amazing.
And they were supporting really every day the fruit service meetings.
You never were searching for service partners.
Anytime you wanted to go to a ministry,
you had a person to go with.
And Jehovah blessed it because while we had a couple of Bible studies
and we were afraid.
But after we started, it was a nice result
that Jehovah blessed pioneers in our congregation.
Then what was the next change for you after you started pioneering?
What came next?
Well, I felt that some change need to be done
because I was little tired of everything.
I was working eight hours day, securely.
It was full-time work.
And it was kind of international company
where everybody was just concerned about their career growth
and everything was about efficiency and work.
I was a little afraid to even go.
Nobody ever asked for a reducing working hour.
It was like more work.
It's better.
So we started to pray about it.
And finally, I went.
And they granted me that I could work from eight to 12 in the morning.
But the amazing thing was that they gave me almost the same salary
as I had for eight hours, like full-time work.
So your salary basically doubled.
You would have to work, right?
How did you take advantage of that?
Well, at the time, the RTO was open.
Yeah.
And I was helping with the construction of the RTO
and our kingdom hall.
And I started to commute for the RTO
to care about some technical stuff.
And you were helping us going the RTO as commuter?
Yes.
I was working like with service, food service,
and like with lunch.
But I needed to be there at lunch time.
So I needed to go back to employer and ask for,
like, moving my work time to the early morning hours.
So I would wake up 4.30 until work like until 10.
Actually, they granted also this thing to me.
And we've seen that it was Jehovah behind
because it was nothing normal in this environment.
So now you, with that change,
you were able to fully support the assignment at the RTO.
Yeah, I could commute.
Where did that lead to next?
We were very happy at the time because we were pioneering.
We had a little bit of pioneering,
a bit of battle because of RTO.
And we felt that we are doing a lot because of the work
and also supporting what we could.
But then we decided to apply for school,
for King the Evangelizers.
And then we submitted the application.
There was a convention.
So a couple from battle came.
And the brother, he asked us one question.
And we still remember that question.
Are you willing to serve anywhere?
And we were like, yes, of course.
We are willing.
And he asked us, what about battle service?
Well, we never thought about battle.
It was quite surprising for us.
But then we think about this encouragement.
We prayed about that.
And we decided to submit our applications for battle.
And surprising, maybe in several months,
we were invited to serve at battle.
And so approximately what were your ages around this time
when you're finally now entering battle service?
I was 31, 32.
She was younger.
We'll leave it at that.
Good, good.
So when you look back,
when you're alive now,
how do you feel about the adjustments
that you made in your service to Jehovah?
We never regretted any of those decisions,
setting spiritual goals,
start by entering support artio,
apply for battle service.
Maybe one change we would do.
We would start earlier if we could.
Definitely.
Well, there's probably a number of us
that would feel similarly.
But we're glad that you did make those adjustments.
And it's obvious that Jehovah has blessed you for doing so.
Thank you so much for taking time
to share your wonderful story with us.
It really touched our hearts
and we appreciate that.
Our pleasure.
Thank you.
Next, we'll enjoy the company of Jose
and Andreina Palais.
Welcome to the Inside Story
for Gilead Class 152.
Did you think you would ever hear those words in your lifetime?
No.
Never.
In fact, being a Gilead,
that is, it is a surprise of our lives.
Yes, it is definitely a surprise we never thought.
Well, we are certainly happy to have you with us.
So you came to Gilead from Peru, Bethel.
But before that, your home was Montreal,
Montreal, Canada.
How did that happen?
So I was born in Caracas in Venezuela.
And that's where I learned the truth.
When I was born, my grandmother was a witness.
So she taught me the truth.
Eventually, my mother, she got baptized.
So she continued raising me in the truth.
And when I was 10 years old,
my family decided to move to immigrate to Montreal, Canada.
So we arrived there.
It was my mother, my brother,
and my non-believer stepfather.
OK.
So you go from Caracas, Venezuela
to Montreal, Canada at 10 years of age.
How did you wind up in Montreal, Jose?
I was born in Lima in Peru.
And I heard about Jehovah when he was a child.
The witnesses were coming to my house.
Some of my older brothers even studied the Bible.
Then when it was a teenager,
due to the political and economical situation of the country,
my parents decided to move to Canada,
to Montreal, Canada.
My older brother was already living in Canada.
And he wasn't really a witness.
But sadly,
sadly, soon after we arrived,
a few months after my father, he died.
Oh, sorry to hear that.
Thank you.
So my mom and I was with my brother.
But at that time, the congregation helped us a lot to progress
and get baptized.
So I made it a goal to strengthen my relationship with Jehovah.
Then at the right moment of my life,
I made Andreina and eventually we got married.
What happens next with you, too?
Now that you're married.
So when we got married, we were not regular pioneers.
But we had spoken about it.
We definitely wanted to make ourselves available.
What were you doing then if you weren't regular pioneering at that point?
We both had a full-time jobs.
And we were comfortable and enjoyed both of our jobs,
secular jobs.
So the idea of regular pioneering was there.
Like I said, it was a goal that I previously had.
But we had a long way to go.
Now, you had mentioned to me earlier
that you were about 16 years older.
So when you first had this goal to pioneer.
Yes.
From 16 to what point do you finally now
reach entering the pioneer service?
Yes. So we started.
I was in my late 20s when we started.
I was in my mid 30s when I started.
We wanted to, like we said before,
we wanted to increase our service to Jehovah.
But there were different challenges there.
It's different adjustment that we wanted to do.
And something a turning point that happened at that time.
When we wanted to expand our ministry service
to be more useful in the hands of Jehovah.
The street could overheat of that time.
It was brother Jean Papino, his wife, sister Carla Papino.
They encouraged us very much to take the regular pioneering.
Yes.
I remember being with them out in the ministry during the week
that they would come to the congregation.
And we always make a stop and go for coffee.
And we would enjoy their experiences and just that happiness
that we would see in them after each visit as a family worship.
We would discuss and see how we could then simplify our lives.
Because that was it.
We needed to simplify our lives.
And we started by taking regularly the auxiliary pioneer.
And we became then eventually we started both
this new chapter of our lives.
We became regular pioneers.
Now you're in your early to mid 30s.
You're in your late 20s.
And now you're with that encouragement.
You're entering the pioneer service. That's good.
So the pioneering, what you started pioneering is
is that what now stirred your desire
to want to serve with the need was greater?
Oh, no, not at all.
We always thought that serving in another country
or with the need is greater even where the country we were
was some maybe an experience from the yearbook,
but not for us.
And we thought that we just had waited too long,
probably to take those type of decisions.
So it was not something that we thought we could do.
Correct. That's it.
Many times we thought that we have waited too long
to start regular pioneering.
So the idea of serving in another country
was never came to our mind.
However, another turning point in our life
was the encouragement of brother Jean Papino
and his wife.
Now you mentioned to me earlier that
Brother Papino gave you an illustration
that really got you thinking.
What was that?
Yes. When we were deciding to move,
there was always fears.
It's certain fears.
Despite the fact that we were kind of already
have the decision to go.
So I mentioned this to Brother Papino
about the fears we have.
So he gave me an illustration.
He told me, imagine there is a father
and in front of him is a table.
And on top of the table is his baby child
of a two-year-old.
And then all of a sudden,
imagine that the child jumps to the floor
and he asks me,
what do you think the father is going to do?
And I say, wow, he's going to write
or we're going to try to grab his baby
to a boy he stays on the floor.
And he told me, well, that's exactly
what you hope is going to do.
If you jump to Peru,
if you step over to Peru.
So that was beautiful.
And that gave us the strength,
we can say, to achieve
and take the decision to move to Peru.
So what an illustration
to get your minds and hearts thinking on it.
Like he said, there was many fears.
And also, we had our lives in Canada,
our families.
We had never been away from our families.
But the encouragement we received
definitely made a good impression.
And then we prayed about it.
And yes, we thought that it was possible for us.
But it was not easy.
We still wanted to do certain,
needed to do certain adjustments.
So Brother Papino was always encouraging us.
Yes, he said, just to try it one year or two.
Just to try it.
If something doesn't work,
then you can always come back.
But you can taste what it is.
What difference did that make for you?
For him to give you that encouragement,
to just put it in the context of just a year or two.
Did that affect your decision at all?
You know, way yes.
Because, you know, the idea of moving,
it was a big change.
It was a big decision for us.
And having in mind that we could go for one year,
try it out, and then come back,
it kind of smoothed the fears.
So that was a good example for us.
And we took the decision to move.
We make certain adjustments in our life,
in our secular works.
We sell our belongings.
And we set up a date.
We had a date and said, by the end of this year,
that was in 2012, we need to go to Peru.
Yes.
So you get down there.
Where do you go once you arrive there?
We arrive to Lima.
And just a few weeks after,
we move to Takna.
This is the city in the south of Peru,
border with Chile.
We took a bus from Lima to Takna.
That's 22 hours travel, a trip of 22 hours.
So the south of Peru is desert.
So you could imagine.
So after five hours, six hours, seven hours, ten hours.
I saw it on my left.
It was sand.
My ride was sand.
On the back was sand.
In the front was sand.
So I said, Sandrina, where are we going?
No idea.
It was like that at all.
But eventually, after 22 hours,
we could see the city.
We arrived.
And yes, we were not going to leave just on sand.
There was actually a city there.
And that was going to be our new home.
It started since the beginning of the first day.
Jehovah was proving us that he was going to be there with us.
And then another door opened for us.
And that was to apply for the Biblical school
for Christian couples back then.
So when that door opened,
we knew that the idea of just one year or two in Peru
was going to change.
And that's what happened.
We attended school.
One year and a half after we arrived in Tacna,
that's when we were invited.
And then we received an assignment.
Yes.
They give us the assignment to serve as temporary special pioneers
in Abancai, which is in the Andes area of Peru.
So you went from the desert to the mountains?
Yes.
So how long were you there in your special pioneer assignment?
It was in total maybe five months.
Yes.
Why so short?
The branch office calls us again,
telling us that now we were going to receive an order assignment
to work in the circuit work, serving the circuit work.
But the circuit work was going to be in Lima.
So you still had yet another course adjustment ahead of you.
How long were you there in the circuit work now in Lima?
So around the two years serving in that circuit work,
in that circuit,
the branch office called me.
And the brother told me that they wanted to see us at the branch
next Monday.
So he said, fine, we can go there.
We can be there at next Monday at 8 a.m.
And he said, just make sure to bring your things
to stay two weeks with us.
Two weeks.
What was going through your mind when they told you that?
We actually had no idea.
They told us a training.
So we went for two weeks.
Yes.
And then at the end of the two weeks,
they told us the extended for two a month.
After one month, they extended two months.
After two months, they extended six months.
And then when all this happened, I said, wait a minute.
Two weeks, one month, two months, six months.
Am I entering Bethel at my mid-40s?
Yes.
So it was surprising for us.
And after six months, maybe I can say that.
Yes, after six months, we received a letter
that was our new assignment.
And we could not believe it.
I mean, like he said, we had passed that age or reached that age
where normally you don't start serving at Bethel.
It's so how long have you been there in the Bethel and Peru?
It's been six years.
Six years.
Yes.
So how many years then has it been since you left Montreal?
Almost 10 years.
10 years.
Do you think, Brother Papino knew what he was doing when he told you
to just try it for a year, too?
He definitely knew the blessings that we were going to enjoy in Peru.
And I think the best counsel he gave us just to give it a try
for one year and see how it goes was the best.
And a whole decade has passed since then.
When you look back over those life course adjustments,
how do you feel about the decisions you've made?
Well, we don't regret any of these decisions.
We just feel so grateful since the beginning,
also the way that our both of our families supported us,
also the examples of brothers like that couple, Jean and Carla Papino,
everything.
We've seen how Jehovah has guided us,
how he has given us blessings that we never foresaw coming.
And all these new chapters that we added into our lives,
we are very happy for that.
Yes, we're very, very grateful to all those,
the brothers and sisters that helped us along the way.
And like my wife is saying it, we don't regret it at all.
And we couldn't do it before.
But Jehovah knew the specific time.
Looking back, we can only express our deep appreciation and joy for Jehovah's blessings.
All praises goes to Jehovah.
And we're totally convinced that there's never too late to reach out in Jehovah's service.
Well, we are so proud of you both for making those course adjustments.
And it's clear that Jehovah has been with you and blessing you along the way.
Thank you so much for sharing your encouraging story with us.
And we pray for Jehovah's rich blessing on you as you continue on in your faithful service.
Thank you for joining us today.
Thank you.
So, as you've heard, all four individuals had to make course adjustments,
step out of their comfort zone and take a leap of faith.
Their stories helped us to appreciate that it is never too late to serve Jehovah in new and expanded ways.
And when we take that leap of faith as did these two couples, what would Jehovah do for us?
Recall Jesus' words at Matthew 17, verse 20.
If you have faith the size of a mustard grain,
you will say to this mountain move from here to there, and it will move,
and nothing will be impossible for you.
You see, unlike a book, your story is far from over.
It is not locked in, finished.
There is still time to make revisions and add new chapters.
And if you take that leap of faith,
Jehovah promises to move mountains,
and nothing will be impossible for you.
We look forward to being with you again on the next edition of the Inside Story.
Well, thank you very much, brother Chilton, and those who joined you in this presentation.
It certainly was very encouraging, wasn't it, for us to see,
and be reminded that it's true, some perhaps start pioneering in the teenage years,
but then others a little later.
So never feel that you're locked in to a certain decision.
So what a good encouragement that was.